# process of encryption and decryption

The major of process of sending a message safely.

Suppose Allen want to send a message "Hello World" to Bob.

    1) Allen encrypts the plaintext "Hello World" to ciphertext.
    2) Allen sends the ciphertext to Bob.
    3) Bob recieves the ciphertext from Allen.
    4) Bob decrypts the ciphertext to plaintext.
    
Now, you may have came up with questions, how to encrypt and decrypt it?    

There are two major category to encrypt the plaintext.

Traditional cryptography:

    1) Symmetric cryptography (中文譯:對稱加密法)
    2) Asymmetric cryptography (中文譯:非對稱加密法) (also called public-key cryptography) (中文譯:又稱公開加密法)
    
    Asymmetric cryptography == public-key cryptography
    
Emerging cryptography:

    3) Digital signature
    
    
Since digital signature is developed in recentl year, I will not discuss this approaches.

## Symmetric cryptography

Suppose Allen want to send a message "Hello World" to Bob.

    1) Allen encrypts the plaintext "Hello World" to ciphertext using the private key (it behaves as a program, it can translate any plaintexts and ciphertexts using an algorithm).
    2) Allen sends the ciphertext and private key to Bob.
    3) Bob recieves the ciphertext and private key from Allen.
    4) Bob decrypts the ciphertext to plaintext using the private key.
    
NOTE that 
    
    1) It is important to protect the private key. If it is intercepted by others, then the ciphertext may be decrypted in a very short time.
    
    If it is lost, it may be very hard to decrypt the ciphertext.
    
    2) Using a safe algorithm as private keys. If NOT do so, the ciphertext will be decrypt in a very short time.
    
    3) Here a safe algorithm refers an algorithm which, for any ciphertext, it can NOT be decrypted in available time (theoretically, it is the best to use a NP-time algorithm.)
    
## Ref

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Symmetric-key_algorithm
    
## Asymmetric cryptography

It is more complicated.

Suppose Allen want to send a message "Hello World" to Bob.

    1) Bob uses random generator to generates public key and private key.
    2) Bob releases the public key and tell Allen how to get public key.
    3) Allen gets the public key.
    4) Allen encrypts the plaintext to ciphertext using the public key.
    5) Allen sends the ciphertext to Bob.
    6) Bob recievesthe ciphertext.
    7) Bob decrypts the ciphertext to plaintext using his own private key.
    
    
### Feature

There are lots of interesting features in asymmetric cryptography.

1. Let m be the message, c be the public key and d be the private key.

         m will be plaintext.
    
         c(m) will be ciphertext.
         
         d(c(m)) will be plaintext.
        
        
We always have
        
        m = d(c(m))
  
### NOTE that
 NOTE that 
    
    1) It is important to protect the private key. If it is intercepted by others, then the ciphertext may be decrypted in a very short time.
    
    2) It is also important to prevent to lose the plaintext for Allen. If lost, he or she will never know the plaintext (original text) 
    
    until he or she knows the private key which is generated by Bob.
    
    3) The public is available for anyone. However, without the private key, it is very hard to decrypt the ciphertext to plaintext (even for a long time) 
    (For a strong message, it is NOT available to decrypt. It may take over than a century. Here a strong message like a strong password.)
    
## Ref
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography

# Ref
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cryptography
